---
status: true
aliases:
  - Engaging North Korea - environmental cooperation in peacebuilding
authors: Annie Young Song, Justin V. Hastings
year: 2020
reference:
  - zotero://select/items/@songEngagingNorthKorea2020
type: cite
tags:
  - academic/law
  - academic/envs
cssclasses:
  - novel
icon: LiBookmark
---

# Engaging North Korea - environmental cooperation in peacebuilding
### Annie Young Song, Justin V. Hastings 

# Abstract
Despite ongoing political tensions and sanctions, North Korea and South Korea have made some progress in forestry cooperation. To explain the persistence of this cooperation, we draw upon a local approach to environmental peacebuilding. By tracing inter-Korean forestry cooperation from 2000 to 2018, this study finds that cooperation persists because of a North Korean desire for cooperation specifically on the environment, and because non-governmental organisations (NGOs) with close ties to the South Korean government provided an alternative way to implement inter-Korean forestry cooperation through periods of tension. Our findings also highlight the benefits of using environmental cooperation as a way to engage with North Korea in a depoliticised and sanction-free context. This finding has far-reaching implications for environmental peacebuilding. First, NGOs can pave the way for engaging conflict parties even in the face of ongoing hostility. Second, environmental cooperation provides an opportunity for a win–win strategy for conflict parties.

# Annotations
“While the areas of cooperation cover a variety of humanitarian and economic activities, including building infrastructure, organising cultural activities, improving public sanitation and reuniting families from the two Koreas (South Korea Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2018), environmental cooperation appears to be one of the initial endeavours to bring conflict resolution in the Korean peninsula” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 1)

“Indeed, in past inter-Korean Summits, both Koreas consistently included environmental cooperation as one of the ways to improve inter-Korean relations.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 1)

“the two Koreas prioritised forestry cooperation (South Korea Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2018). As a result, North Korean and South Korean working-level officials convened to discuss detailed plans for forestry cooperation, on 4 July and then again on 22 October 2018. There were four pledges to implement environmental cooperation with a focus on forestry: afforestation, pest control, exchange of technology on forest seedlings and discussion about environmental challenges. Specifically, both sides agreed to‘modernize ten tree nurseries in North Korea within the year and exterminate the pinewood nematode in North Korea by March of the next year” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 2)

“After the 2007 inter-Korean Summit, for example, North and South Korea pinned down an arrangement to implement seedling technology and pest control management at the first working-level meeting.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 2)

“, despite a mutual interest in forestry cooperation from the two Koreas, progress has been slow and sporadic. Tension in the Korean peninsula has a significant influence on project implementation outcomes.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 2)

“The escalating hostility in the Korean peninsula has hampered general economic and cultural cooperation. Yet surprisingly, environmental cooperation has made some progress” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 2)

“). For instance, Green One Korea (GOK) was able to initiate conferences and meetings on forestry involving academics and policy experts from both Koreas after the May 24 measures in 2010. Furthermore, experts from both Koreas jointly conducted an investigation on the spread of a pest in pine trees in North Korea, in response to North Korea’s request in 2012 and 2015” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 2)

“What explains the persistence of environmental cooperation despite relatively high levels of hostility between the two Koreas?” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 2)

“. In doing so, we argue that cooperation persisted because of demand for environmental cooperation specifically, and because of the ways in which that cooperation has been carried out. First, North Korea desires environmental cooperation and aid. Environmental cooperation offers an issue area that is relatively de-politicised and generally free of sanction limitations, so North Korea continues to seek environmental cooperation with South Korea (and other countries), even during periods of tension that it itself initiates.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 2)

“intermediaries in environmental cooperation that can continue operating through periods of inter-government tension.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 3)

“In our case of the Korean peninsula, South Korea has long seen environmental cooperation as a practical way to start a dialogue with North Korea, because environmental issues are less constrained by political tensions and economic sanctions” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 3)

“Although there have been disruptions in environmental cooperation immediately following high tensions in the Korean peninsula, environmental cooperation has eventually restarted. In the case of the May 24 measures, for instance, environmental cooperation restarted after a two-year break. In this sense, environmental cooperation offers an opportunity to engage conflict parties through thick and thin, independent from and prior to peace, and thereby contributes to peacebuilding.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 3)

“Existing studies assume that environmental cooperation between the two Koreas, such as conserving biodiversity and wildlife in the demilitarized zone (DMZ), can contribute to peacebuilding (Hayes 2010; Westing 2010). North Korea in particular has been actively participating in international environmental agreements, which can lead to peacebuilding opportunities (Kim and Ali 2016). Echoing the positive effects of environmental cooperation on peacebuilding, environmental NGOs based in South Korea claim that environmental cooperation could halt North Korea’s nuclear programme, through building a unification strategy via environmental cooperation” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 4)

“role of local, non-state actors in peacebuilding and international environmental cooperation.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 4)

“Environmental peacebuilding refers to‘the process through which environmental challenges shared by the (former) parties to the violent conflict are turned into opportunities to build lasting cooperation and peace’ (Dresse et al. 2019, 104). This definition includes all types of cooperation on environmental issues between different groups, with the intent to create less violent and more peaceful relations between these groups” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 4)

“While environmental peacebuilding and peacebuilding have similar goals of restoring peace and stability in conflict zones, environmental peacebuilding has notable features that distinguish it from standard peacebuilding. Because environmental challenges are considered less politicised and inherently humanitarian, the environment has traditionally been” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 4)

“THIRD WORlD QUARTERlY 5 relatively uncomplicated issue over which to start a dialogue between conflict parties” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 5)

“Cooperation projects improve the relations between state actors, which strengthens their interdependence. In this sense, environmental cooperation can be a tool to mitigate and potentially resolve conflicts. This strand of research shares the assumption that environmental cooperation may contribute to creating interdependence, and further a shared identity between formerly conflicting actors.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 5)

“Others have found minimal impact of environmental cooperation on the peacebuilding process. Environmental cooperation after natural disasters‘can catalyze diplomatic activities’ but does not ‘create diplomatic activities’ (Kelman 2006). This means that environmental problems alone do not suggest potential opportunities for peacebuilding between former conflict parties.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 6)

“First, there is a demand for environmental cooperation: afforestation is related to food security, which is vital for the survival of the North Korean regime.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 7)

“there is a means for cooperation that persists across inter-government tensions. South Korean NGOs are the main actors in engaging North Korea, and are tied to, but formally separate from, the South Korean government. As such they are able to play the role of the intermediary actor in environmental cooperation and generate a win–win strategy for both North and South Korea.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 8)

“North Korea has suffered from significant desertification over the last decades. The forest area dropped from approximately 70% to 40% of the total land area between 1990 and 2016.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 8)

“This decrease in forestry is daunting, especially when the neighbouring country, South Korea, has preserved most of its forest area during the same period. Desertification has become a serious threat to North Korea because it has led to soil erosion, endangering North Koreans in flooding seasons. In the summer of 2018, for instance, severe flooding and landslides resulted in 76 casualties in Hwanghae province, many of whom were children” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 8)

“Flooding caused by desertification has also led to food shortages” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 8)

“Flooding destroys not only buildings but also croplands, which can exacerbate famines. According to the United Nations (UN), which visited North Korea after the 1995 and 1996 floods, there was a loss of 1.9 million tons of crops in addition to property damages. The annual recurrence of floods has exacerbated the problem of chronic starvation. As of 2017, approximately 41% of North Koreans are suffering from malnourishment” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 8)

“The severity of desertification in North Korea has been recognised by inter-governmental organisations and international NGOs. After the 2016 flood, the North Korean government called for urgent help from the international community (Jozuka 2016a). Aid has transitioned from one-time relief funds to addressing longer term needs as aid providers have realised the importance of encouraging afforestation to tackle the fundamental problems of the floods. In 2001, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) launched the Agricultural Recovery and Environmental Protection project with a South Korean NGO partner to support afforestation in North Korea. The 2011–2015 UNDP Plan also allocated budgets for improving forestry management and practices in North Korea (UNDP 2011). Similarly, the recent report published by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and World Food Programme (WFP) highlighted the importance of afforestation and forest conservation in tackling the food security issue” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 8)

“In order to resolve the underlying problems persistent starvation linked to frequent floods, North Korea has promoted afforestation policies at a domestic level. The first long-term policy plan was released in 2001, with the objective of cultivating 1.5 million hectares of forests from 2001 to 2010. In furtherance of this objective, the central government established local agencies to implement the plan, and banned deforestation for the use of cropping. However, due to famine, North Koreans began to cut down trees and use the land to grow crops.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 8)

“While the government’s intention for forestry conservation in domestic policies has been unambiguous, the success of the plan is less clear. To improve efforts in forest rehabilitation, in April 2012 the North Korean leader, Kim Jong un, declared a goal of restoring forests within 10 years (Jung 2018). Under the forestry rehabilitation campaign, the North Korean government has emphasised the importance of reforestation. Kim’s announcement signified the official prioritisation of afforestation.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 9)

“In addition to domestic policies, North Korea has linked the interest in reforestation efforts with climate change. At the 2015 Climate Change Conference held in Paris, North Korea sent a delegate who claimed that‘a war on deforestation’has been launched in order to take part in international efforts to adapt to climate change (Guardian 2015). The afforestation plan aimed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, which contributes to achieving North Korea’s target – a reduction by 37.4% compared with the 1990 level. This commitment was reiterated in the 2016 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by identifiying policies to ‘manage and develop forest in a sustainable manner’ as one of the measures for achieving the target of greenhouse gas reduction (DPRK 2016a). Most recently, the North Korean representative highlighted how afforestation can contribute to environmental protection and economic development in the 2019 fourth session of the UN Environmental Assembly” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 9)

“Assembly (UN Environmental Assembly 2019). Framing reforestation as a part of international efforts to mitigate greenhouse gas, North Korea participated consistently in the UNFCCC during the period 2009–2018” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 9)

“In the 2012 Second National Communication on Climate Change report, the North Korean government claimed that building the capacity for forestry management has been one of its priorities in tackling climate change, along with ongoing clean development mechanism (CDM) projects. The use of afforestation as a tool for mitigating climate change continued to appear in the statements made by the North Korean delegation in the UNFCCC.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 9)

“In the 2015 UNFCCC, the North Korean Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that, Recently the respected Comrade Kim Jong Un, First Chairman of the National Defence Commission of the DPRK [North Korea] has declared a war on deforestation and put forward a massive project to turn all the mountains of the country into the mountains of gold thickly wooded with trees.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 9)

“Based on this massive project, we are currently carrying out a plan to afforest and reforest 167 hectares of mountainous areas that includes planting 6.3 billion trees in the coming 10 years and mobilized the entire country and the popular masses for the implementation of this plan.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 10)

“In the following year, the North Korean delegates made a similar remark, highlighting the forest rehabilitation campaign as one of their contributions to mitigating climate change: In accordance with [the] 5-year strategy for national economic development adopted in May 2016, national economic development, national energy and climate change issues are to be addressed simultaneously by improving the efficiency of electric power generating facilities and by scaling up the utilization of renewable energy. Specifically, progress was recently made in conducting the forest restoration campaign in [North Korea] as one of the measures taken by the government in combating the climate change, under the wise leadership of the respected Comrade Kim Jong Un, Chairman of the State Affairs Commission of the DPRK [North Korea]. (DPRK 2016b)” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 10)

“This surprising engagement of one of the most isolated countries in the world could be explained by the following reasons. First, participation in the UNFCCC could generate opportunities for North Korea to gain international assistance.4 By ratifying the Kyoto Protocol in 2005, North Korea became a non-Annex I party, which granted it the right to host emission-reduction projects sponsored by Annex I parties (developed countries). For instance, there are currently six CDM projects registered in 2012 with the Czech Republic that are relevant to energy industries, including building hydropower plants.5 This experience could have shaped an incentive to further advance the linkage between forest rehabilitation and climate change.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 10)

“Second, desertification has become a severe threat to food security, which may become an important factor in maintaining political stability in North Korea. Environmental problems are closely connected with political stability in North Korea. Environmental disasters (ie flooding in 1994 and drought in 1997) compounded the famine in the 1990s caused by North Korea's dysfunctional institutions and the withdrawal of Soviet aid (Haggard and Noland 2007; Woo-Cumings 2002). Food security continues to be a problem in North Korea, which may lead to political destabilisation in the future (Habib 2010).” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 10)

“North Korea’s receptivity to cooperating and interacting with other countries in forestry plays an important role in shaping its motivations for cooperating with South Korea. Despite the imposition of the UN sanctions following the nuclear tests, North Korea has continued to send delegations to UNFCCC and has made statements emphasising afforestation efforts. This behaviour is not common considering that other international environmental meetings have not been able to engage North Korea. In this sense, North Korea’s aspiration for reforestation creates a precondition where South Korean actors can pave the way to cooperate with North Korea even during periods of heightened tension in the Korean peninsula.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 10)

“Since the late 1990s, there have been several NGOs based in South Korea delivering forestry cooperation projects in North Korea. The Peace Forest (PF), established in 1999, was a key actor in delivering seedling resources to North Korea when the Korea Asia-Pacific Peace Committee requested aid in the form of pine tree seedlings and nursery fertilisers (Korea Forest Research Institute 2010). The Korea Society of Tree Protection partnered with the Mount Kumgang International Tourism Cooperation in providing pest control products and machinery to prevent the spread of pine gall midges on Mount Kumgang, North Korea. Other forestry-related NGOs, including the Korea Forestry Successor Association and the Korea Forest Management Association, supplied tree seedlings in early 2000. In addition, non-forestry-focussed actors, such as the Korean Rotary Club, the New Millennium life Movement, the Republic of Korea National Red Cross, and humanitarian NGOs, also donated seedlings, suggesting that forestry was a field that could attract interest from a variety of NGOs (Green One Korea 2018). The South Korean government’s support has become a critical factor in NGO forestry cooperation with North Korea, with North–South declarations providing part of the impetus for cooperation, and the NGOs providing the means for implementation. South Korean NGOs established an NGO network called ‘Green One Korea’ in April 2007 to facilitate forestry cooperation between the two Koreas based upon the 10.4 Declaration, announced at the 2007 inter-Koreas’Summit. The declaration promised cooperation on establishing tree nurseries and improving forestry management. To implement the commitments, the two sides agreed to initiate working-level meetings in March 2008. The favourable atmosphere for dialogue created room for North Korea to ask for assistance in forestry. In response, the Korean Council for Reconciliation and Cooperation in North Korea and North Korea’s AsiaPacific Peace Committee asked South Korean NGOs to support their tree-planting campaigns in February 2007 (Ham 2007). The GOK’s members included humanitarian organisations, environmental NGOs, religious groups, media companies, and local governments. With its diverse range of members, the GOK sought to provide a systematic and long-term plan to restore forests in North Korea, and published the 2007–2016 Comprehensive Framework for Green Forestation Project in North Korea, which consisted of the 2007–2011 and 2011–2016 Five Year Plans (Oh 2010). These plans focussed on four specific areas: seeding, reforestation, pest control and public participation. Seedling projects aimed to transfer knowledge of seedling technology to improve North Korea’s capacities to build and operate tree nurseries. Reforestation projects mainly covered the restoration of deserted areas and the implementation of measures for preventing land erosion. Pest control projects included efforts to restore a healthy ecological system and to prevent desertification of the land. Finally, public participation projects extended the actors involved in forestation by launching public campaigns.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 11)

“The utility of the state–NGO relationship is demonstrated in the establishment of a quasi-NGO called Green Asia Organization (GAO), which focuses on forestry restoration by ‘reviving the ecosystem of the Korean peninsula with green forestation [which] will bring trust between the two Koreas’(Climate Change Center n.d.). GAO has close ties to the South Korean government, in the following ways. First, the Head of Operations is a former prime minister of Korea, Goh Kun.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 11)

“As a quasi-NGO, GAO was able to offer a platform to interact with North Korea even when high tensions between state actors created difficulties in inter-Korea cooperation. With the onset of the May 24 measures and the ratcheting up of UN sanctions, non-state actors have become an alternative way to interact with North Korea. Beginning in 2014, GOK launched the Annual Northeast Asia Forestry Cooperation Conference in China, where environmental cooperation in North Korea has been the main topic for discussion. The first meeting was held in October 2014 at Yanbian University in China. In addition to representatives and scholars from China, Japan, Mongolia and South Korea, North Korean representatives from the Ministry of land and Environmental Protection attended the conference. At the third (2017) conference, North Korean representatives began asking for assistance more actively. For instance, they insisted on their potential to resolve deforestation and food shortage by presenting their advancements in forestry technology (SPN Seoul-Pyongyong News Editing Team 2017). The most recent meeting, in 2018, focussed on finding a means to support afforestation in North Korea. This agenda was proposed by the South Korean delegation, which sent more than 30 government officials to the conference (Maeil Business Newspaper 2018).6 While South Korean government officials were involved in the meetings, NGOs’role in this case was to initiate and host an event in a third country, where North Korean and South Korean officials could push forward environmental cooperation. State–NGO relations appear to influence peacebuilding activities even by international NGOs based in South Korea. For instance, the Hanns Seidel Foundation (HSF) has been more effective in delivering cooperation projects in North Korea compared to other international NGOs that are not based in South Korea. Although it is sponsored by the German government, HSF has been working closely with the South Korean government by providing advice and exchanging information (HSF n.d.c). Between 2014 and 2017, HSF initiated afforestation projects in North Korea with financial resources from the European Union (HSF n.d.a). The project involved North Korean government agencies and research institutes, including the Ministry of land and Environment Protection, and the ministry’s Forest Management Research Institute. HSF funded North Korean representatives to receive international training on sustainable forestry management programmes so that they could bring these skills to their North Korean colleagues. In addition to providing skills training, they indicated an interest in participating in international cooperation during their interaction with the international community (HSF n.d.b). In this sense, HSF created an alternative platform for communication and exchanges between the two Koreas.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 12)

“It is notable that it is only the non-governmental status of North Korea’s partners that is relevant in allowing environmental cooperation to persist through periods of hostility; the partners in North Korea engaged in forestry cooperation are by necessity government organisations, because there are no NGOs (or private organisations of any kind) in North Korea.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 12)

“In contrast to NGO-led cooperation, state-led cooperation has fared less well during periods of tension. After the May 24 measures, beginning in 2013, the South Korean government attempted to promote stability by pursuing an inter-Korean environmental cooperation strategy, Green Détente. This strategy aimed to create a joint environmental community in order to facilitate communication between the two Koreas and thereby contribute to reducing tension in the Korean peninsula. To this end, the South Korean government planned to assist North Korea’s reforestation and energy system, along with building an ecological belt throughout the Korean peninsula and tackling climate change (Chu et al. 2013, 12). South Korean President Park Geun-Hye proposed, in the 2013 New Year Press Conference and at the UN General Assembly in 2014, to build a DMZ World Eco-Peace Park. This specific policy departed from national security policy towards North Korea given that the park administration was conservative and considered North Korea a primary enemy. However, the plan did not resonate with North Korea, which dismissed the proposal quickly (South Korea Ministry of Unification 2013). This comparison illustrates the important role of NGOs in facilitating inter-Korean environmental cooperation, where state actors cannot easily assume this capacity.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 13)

“Similarly, environmental cooperation supported by local governments could not engage North Korea. The local governments adjacent to North Korea have been interested in implementing environmental cooperation projects. For instance, Gangwondo was the first local government to promulgate a regulation on inter-Korea cooperation in 1998. Initially, the efforts to enhance forestry cooperation emerged from the need to prevent the spread of pests from North Korea” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 13)

“Despite the Koreas’ambitious commitments as state actors, local governments could not proceed with their inter-Korean cooperation projects after the May 24 measures in 2010. In this sense, state–state cooperation projects are more likely to be vulnerable to a change in political factors compared to NGO-led cooperation.” (Song and Hastings, 2020, p. 14)
- - - 
## Citation
Song, Annie Young, and Justin V. Hastings. "Engaging North Korea: environmental cooperation in peacebuilding." _Third World Quarterly_ 41, no. 11 (2020): 1809-1827.